1. What are the basic components of SQL syntax?

The basic components of SQL syntax include: "SELECT" statement, "FROM" clause, "WHERE" clause, 
"GROUP BY" clause, "ORDER BY" clause, "INSERT" statement, "UPDATE" statement, "DELETE" statement, 
and various clauses like "JOIN" to manipulate data within tables; all categorized under Data Manipulation Language (DML), 
Data Definition Language (DDL), and Data Control Language (DCL) depending on the operation being performed. 

SELECT statement: Used to retrieve data from a database table, specifying which columns to select. 
FROM clause: Specifies the table from which data is to be retrieved. 
WHERE clause: Filters the results based on specific conditions. 
GROUP BY clause: Used to aggregate data based on specific column values. 
ORDER BY clause: Sorts the retrieved data in ascending or descending order. 
INSERT statement: Adds new rows of data to a table. 
UPDATE statement: Modifies existing data within a table. 
DELETE statement: Removes rows from a table.


2. Write the general structure of an SQL SELECT statement

SELECT column1, column2, ... 
FROM table_name 
WHERE condition (optional); General Structure of a SQL SELECT Statement:

SELECT: This keyword indicates that you want to retrieve data from a table.

column1, column2, ...: This is a list of the specific columns you want to retrieve from the table. 
You can select multiple columns by separating them with commas.

FROM table_name: Specifies the table from which you want to retrieve data.

WHERE condition (optional): This clause allows you to filter the results based on a specific condition.
If you don't include a WHERE clause, all rows from the table will be returned.


3. Explain the role of clauses in SQL statements.

In SQL statements, clauses are individual components that define specific actions or conditions to be applied on data, 
essentially acting as building blocks to construct a query and control how data is retrieved, manipulated, or filtered within a database, 
allowing for precise control over the results based on the desired operation; each clause serves a unique purpose like selecting 
specific columns, specifying tables to query from, or applying filters based on certain criteria. 

SELECT name, age FROM employees WHERE age > 30 ORDER BY name ASC;
