1. What is the function of the DROP command in SQL?

The DROP command in SQL removes objects from a database, such as a table, view, index, or database. It's used to permanently delete objects from the database, so it's important to back up the object before using the command. Common Uses of the DROP Command:

Drop a Table: To delete an entire table and all of its data from the database, use:

DROP TABLE table_name;

Example:
DROP TABLE courses;
This removes the courses table, along with all its columns, data, and constraints, from the database.

Drop a Database: To delete an entire database, use:
DROP DATABASE database_name;

Example:
DROP DATABASE university_db;
This removes the university_db database along with all its tables and other objects.

Drop a View: To delete a view from the database, use:
DROP VIEW view_name;

Example:
DROP VIEW student_view;
This removes the view named student_view.


2. What are the implications of dropping a table from a database?

Dropping a table from a database permanently deletes all data stored within that table, including its structure, indexes, constraints, and 
any triggers associated with it, making the data completely inaccessible and requiring the table to be recreated from scratch if needed again; 
essentially, it removes the table definition from the database entirely, freeing up the storage space it occupied.

Key implications of dropping a table:
Data loss:
All rows within the table are permanently deleted and cannot be recovered without backups. 
Invalidated dependent objects:
Any views, stored procedures, or other database objects that reference the dropped table become invalid and will need to be updated. 
Removed constraints and triggers:
All primary keys, foreign keys, unique constraints, and triggers defined on the table are also dropped. 
Storage space reclaimed:
The database reclaims the storage space previously used by the dropped table. 

Example:
If you have a table students, and you want to drop it, you would run:

DROP TABLE students;